Here’s how the app works end-to-end, in plain terms.

What it is
This is a single-page React (Vite) demo. Nothing talks to a real cluster or Prometheus. All numbers and “failures” are simulated in the browser so you can see how observability, SLOs, and a fake storefront might react when you turn chaos on and off.

Main loop: metrics every second
In Dashboard.jsx, a setInterval runs once per second. Each tick it:

Starts from a baseline (roughly random p99 ~40–55ms, CPU ~10–15%, errors ~0).
If you’ve enabled chaos, it adds effects on top:
Network delay → big jump in p99 latency
CPU stress → high CPU, more latency, some errors
Pod kill → errors and latency spike while “pod” is active (it auto-clears after 3s via a one-shot timeout)
Those values are stored in React state (metrics) and passed down to child components.

How “healthy / degraded / failing” is decided
Still in Dashboard, status is derived from the latest metrics (not from a separate server):

Failing if error rate > 5% or p99 > 300ms
Else degraded if there are any errors or p99 > 150ms
Else healthy
That string is used for badges, colors, and the storefront overlay.

What each area does
Piece	Role
Left sidebar
Buttons call toggleChaos(...) to add/remove chaos types from activeChaos. Pod uses a ref + single setTimeout so recovery isn’t re-scheduled every second.
Metrics
Reads metrics + status and shows p99, errors, CPU with colored bars.
AIOps / FinOps / SLO
Derived views of the same fake data (e.g. high CPU → “time to failure” / higher $/hr; SLO budget drains when degraded/failing and refills when healthy).
Storefront
A small UI that disables cart/actions when status is failing and adds a degraded visual treatment; when failing, Dashboard draws a 503 overlay on top of the store section.
Data flow (one picture)
user
state
ui
each 1s tick
Chaos buttons
activeChaos
metrics
status from metrics
Metrics
AIOps / FinOps / SLO
Storefront + overlay
So: you flip chaos flags → the timer perturbs fake metrics → status and all panels update from that same state.

If you want, we can walk through one scenario (e.g. “CPU stress only”) step by step with the exact thresholds from the code.




cd c:\Users\Dell\.gemini\antigravity\scratch\chaos-engineering-playground\app\frontend
npm install
npm run dev




This project is a teaching and storytelling tool. It is not “required” to run a real business; it illustrates why DevOps practices exist and what people optimize for when systems run in production.

Why something like this matters
In production, failures are inevitable (deployments, networks, disks, memory, dependency outages). If you only react after customers are hurt, you learn too late and too expensively.

Chaos engineering (the theme of your UI) is the idea of injecting controlled failures in safe environments to see whether monitoring, autoscaling, retries, and runbooks actually work—before a real incident does it for you.

Where DevOps fits (mapped to your app)
What you see in the app	DevOps / platform angle
Inject failures (pod kill, latency, CPU)
Practice incident response, validate Kubernetes behavior (restarts, scheduling), tune timeouts/retries.
Metrics (p99, errors, CPU)
Observability: if you cannot measure it, you cannot reliably fix or prevent outages.
SLO / error budget
SRE culture: agree on reliability targets, slow or stop risky releases when the budget burns (your “CI/CD locked” panel is a caricature of that policy).
FinOps / cost spike under load
Efficiency tradeoffs: staying reliable often means more capacity; DevOps cares about cost vs risk (autoscaling, rightsizing, spot vs on-demand).
AIOps-style “prediction”
Operational analytics: anomaly detection and forecasting to catch drift early (even when models are imperfect).
One-line summary
DevOps here means building and operating software so that delivery is fast, changes are safe, production is observable, and failure is expected and rehearsed—not a surprise. Your frontend is a sandbox that makes those ideas visible in minutes, without needing a real cluster on your laptop.

If you want this to reflect “real DevOps” more closely, the next step is usually a small real backend + metrics endpoint or wiring to actual Prometheus/Grafana in a lab cluster—but for learning the concepts, the frontend-only simulation is already enough.








C:\Users\Dell\.gemini\antigravity\scratch\chaos-engineering-playground










Below is report-ready material you can paste into a document and trim to your page limit. It is aligned with how this repository actually behaves (client-side simulation, thresholds, and modules).

1. Title and executive summary
Title (suggested): Chaos Engineering Playground — Client-Side Resilience Demonstrator: Purpose, Architecture, and DevOps Relevance

Executive summary:
This project is a browser-only web application that simulates a simplified e-commerce stack (presented as React → Node.js → PostgreSQL) under controlled failure scenarios. Operators toggle “chaos” modes (pod kill, network delay, CPU stress); the UI updates synthetic metrics, service health, SLO-style error budget, cost narrative, and user-facing storefront behavior. It does not require Kubernetes, Prometheus, or a backend service to run. Its value for a report is pedagogical and narrative: it makes abstract DevOps/SRE concepts (observability, SLOs, blast radius, cost of scale) visible and repeatable in a safe environment. It is not a substitute for production chaos tooling (e.g. Chaos Mesh, Litmus, Gremlin) or real telemetry pipelines.

2. Introduction and objectives
Context:
Modern systems fail in ways that are hard to predict from diagrams alone: partial outages, latency tails, cascading retries, autoscaling lag, and budget tradeoffs between reliability and cost.

Objectives of this implementation:

Demonstrate chaos injection as a controlled experiment rather than random breakage.
Show how metrics and derived health states drive operational and product decisions (alerts, degradation, user-visible errors).
Relate engineering work to SRE (service level objectives, error budgets) and FinOps (cost signals under load).
Provide a zero-infrastructure demo suitable for coursework, onboarding, or stakeholder explanations.
Scope (what is in / out of scope):

In scope	Out of scope
UI simulation, 1 Hz metric refresh, toggles, accessibility-oriented patterns
Real cluster orchestration, real fault injection
Educational mapping to Prometheus/Grafana/KubeCost-style ideas
Live integration with those products
Static build and local dev server
Production auth, multi-tenant safety, audit logs
3. Theoretical background (for the “why DevOps” section)
DevOps (in this report’s sense) is the integration of development and operations concerns: fast delivery, automated pipelines, observable production, and feedback loops from incidents into design.

Chaos engineering (principles attributed to practices at large web companies, popularized in industry) holds that:

Distributed systems are too complex to prove reliable by testing happy paths alone.
Injected failures in non-production or carefully bounded production experiments reveal gaps in monitoring, runbooks, timeouts, and capacity.
The goal is learning and hardening, not breaking things for its own sake.
Site Reliability Engineering (SRE) adds:

Service Level Indicators (SLIs) (e.g. latency, availability).
Service Level Objectives (SLOs) (targets over a window).
Error budgets: a quantified allowance for “unreliability”; when the budget is exhausted, teams may prioritize reliability work over feature velocity.
FinOps adds the observation that reliability consumes money (instances, regions, redundancy, autoscaling headroom). Under stress, systems often scale out, changing unit economics.

This project’s UI names tools (Prometheus, Grafana, KubeCost, Nobl9, etc.) as motifs; the implementation remains synthetic.

4. System description (what the application does)
4.1 High-level behavior
The user interacts with a dashboard:

A sidebar lists three chaos experiments.
The main area shows metrics, three “insight” panels (AIOps, FinOps, SLO), and a storefront that represents a customer-facing workload.
A JavaScript timer updates simulated metrics every second. Chaos flags modify the formulas used on each tick. A derived status (healthy, degraded, failing) is computed from those metrics and propagates to colors, copy, storefront disablement, and overlays.

4.2 Chaos experiments (as implemented)
Experiment	Intended real-world analogy	Effect on simulation (approximate)
Pod kill
Replica loss / crash loop
Adds ~50 ms to p99 baseline contribution and ~8–12% error contribution while active; auto-expires after 3 seconds (single recovery timer).
Network delay
Slow DB or cross-AZ latency
Adds ~200–250 ms to p99.
CPU stress
Hot loop / insufficient limits
Adds ~80–90% CPU, ~100–200 ms p99, and ~1.5% error rate contribution.
Baseline each second (with no chaos): p99 roughly 40–55 ms, CPU roughly 10–15%, errors 0% (before chaos contributions).

4.3 Health classification (global status)
Derived in the dashboard (not from a separate service):

Failing if errorRate > 5% or p99 > 300 ms.
Else degraded if errorRate > 0% or p99 > 150 ms.
Else healthy.
This drives a 503-style overlay on the storefront when failing, and disables cart interactions in that state.

4.4 Metrics panel thresholds (visual tiers)
The metrics cards use slightly finer thresholds for coloring bars and values (for teaching “yellow before red”):

Latency: warning above 150 ms, danger above 300 ms.
Errors: warning above 0%, danger above 5%.
CPU: warning above 60%, danger above 85%.
4.5 AIOps panel (predictive narrative)
Uses CPU > 60% as a simple proxy for “memory pressure / risk” in the demo:

Above threshold: shows a short predicted time-to-failure string.
Below: shows stable messaging.
This illustrates operational analytics without training a real model.

4.6 FinOps panel (cost narrative)
Uses CPU > 50% as a trigger for “autoscaling / burn”:

Low CPU: ~$2.45 / hr (narrative baseline).
High CPU: ~$14.50 / hr and an upward trend message.
This illustrates correlation between load and spend, not real cloud billing APIs.

4.7 SLO / error budget panel
Budget starts at 100%.
While status is not healthy, budget decreases by 1.25% per second.
While healthy, budget recovers by 0.9% every 400 ms until capped at 100%.
CI/CD “gates” flip to a locked narrative when budget falls below 50%.
This encodes the idea of policy tied to reliability consumption: teams might slow releases when budgets are low.

4.8 Storefront and user impact
Degraded: subtle visual treatment (conceptually “slower/flakier” UX).
Failing: storefront actions disabled; overlay communicates 503 / backend timeout narrative.
This ties technical signals to customer-visible outcomes, which is central to incident communication and prioritization.

5. Technical architecture (for an appendix)
Stack (from package.json):

Runtime/UI: React 19, React DOM 19.
Build/tooling: Vite 8, @vitejs/plugin-react, ESLint 10.
Icons: lucide-react.
Component structure (logical):

App.jsx — application shell; includes a skip link for accessibility.
Dashboard.jsx — central state, timers, chaos toggles, status derivation, layout.
Metrics.jsx — presentation of p99, error rate, CPU, roll-up badge.
AIOpsPanel.jsx, FinOpsPanel.jsx, SLOTracker.jsx — derived “operations” stories.
Storefront.jsx — simulated customer workload.
Data flow: User action → updates activeChaos → metric loop reads flags → updates metrics → useMemo computes status → children re-render.

Deployment shape: Static assets after npm run build; can be hosted on any static host (object storage + CDN, GitHub Pages, etc.). No database and no API are required for the current feature set.

External dependency: Product images are loaded from Unsplash URLs; offline or blocked networks may affect image loading only.

6. Non-functional aspects (brief, report-friendly)
Accessibility: Skip-to-main, aria-live status region, aria-pressed on toggles, role="alert" on outage overlay, semantic sections.
Responsive layout: Grid reflows for smaller viewports (sidebar stacks).
Motion: Animations respect prefers-reduced-motion where applicable.
7. Limitations and risks (important for academic honesty)
No causal link to real infrastructure — numbers are deterministic formulas + randomness, not scraped from kube-state-metrics or Prometheus.
Simplified SLO model — real SLOs use SLIs, windows, multi-burn alerts, and multi-service dependencies.
AIOps is symbolic — no ML training, no seasonality, no incident embeddings.
FinOps is illustrative — no CUR (Cost and Usage Report), no allocation tags, no amortization.
Safety — real chaos in production requires blast-radius controls, approvals, observability prerequisites, and rollback plans; this app does not teach those procedural controls unless you add them in narrative or lab policy.
8. Recommendations (future work — bullet list for “conclusions / next steps”)
Add a minimal API (Node/Go) with intentional latency and error endpoints; drive the UI from real HTTP statistics.
Provide a docker-compose lab with Prometheus + Grafana and one instrumented service.
Replace static thresholds with configurable SLO YAML to teach policy-as-code.
Add experiment logs (who toggled what, when) for auditability exercises.
Integrate with a sandbox Kubernetes namespace and tools such as Chaos Mesh only after documenting safety controls.
9. Conclusion (short paragraph)
This application is a focused educational demonstrator of how chaos, observability, SLOs, and cost narratives interact in the mind of a platform engineer. It is sufficient to run as a frontend-only project for teaching and demos. Its importance in a DevOps context is to make abstract reliability engineering ideas tangible: failures become experiments, metrics become decisions, and user experience becomes part of the reliability story. For production-grade chaos practice, the report should clearly separate this simulator from controlled production experimentation and real observability backends.

10. Suggested references (for a bibliography)
N. R. Murphy et al., Site Reliability Engineering (O’Reilly, Google SRE book) — SLOs, error budgets, toil.
A. Basiri et al., “Chaos Engineering” practice descriptions (industry articles / ACMQueue-style pieces).
FinOps Foundation materials — cloud cost accountability and unit economics.
CNCF / Kubernetes documentation — pod lifecycle, probes, HPA (for mapping demos to real objects).
If you tell me your report format (e.g. “2-page memo”, “10-page technical”, “IEEE-style with abstract”), I can reshape this into that structure (add Abstract, numbered sections to match your template, or strip theory to fit a word count).

